text/0002-split-coinstake-transaction/0002-split-coinstake-transaction.md, before:

# Coinstake Transaction Split

- Status: proposed
- Type: enhancement
- Related components: `protocol`
- Start Date: 22-March-2017
- Discussion: (fill me in with link to RFC discussion - shepherd will complete this)
- Author: hrobeers

## Summary
Splitting the coinstake transaction into a *monetary creation* and a *coin-age consumption* transaction allows multiple improvements on peercoin's protocol.
Apart from aligning the coin creation with Proof-of-Work blocks, it does enable to following changes:

* Multi-signature minting, as described in [RFC-0003](../0003-multisig-minting/0003-multisig-minting.md)
* Alignment of the transaction format with bitcoin by moving the coinstake timestamp to the coinbase input (RFC to be created).
* Provides easily manageable limitations on the power of minters to make free transactions.

## Conventions
- The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).
- The verb "TO MINT" or "MINTING" refers to the action of trying to create a Block using Proof-of-Stake. "STAKING" is chosen over "MINTING" to avoid confusion with "MINING".

## Motivation
Multiple community members have been asking about *cold minting* and the power of minters to add *free transactions* to their blocks.
While all this time, a potential solution for both those problems has been sitting in every Proof-of-Stake block, the unused coinbase transaction.
Although the splitting of the coinstake transaction has been described extensively by mquandalle [[1]](https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81), it has never been brought up as a possible alternative for *cold minting*. This RFC focuses on the discussion about splitting the coinstake transaction, the discussion about *multi-signature minting* is part of [RFC-0003](../0003-multisig-minting/0003-multisig-minting.md).

Minters are able to include transaction data without paying the fee when they create a block, limited only by the blocksize.
As a minter of a small number of blocks might not hold many coin at stake, this can be a method by which a bad actor can drastically bloat the chain without much personal loss.
When splitting the coinstake transaction, a natural limit of 1 free KB per minted block will provide minters with flexibility to adjust their outputs as desired while preventing spam.

## Detailed Design
Proof-of-Stake blocks in the original peercoin protocol carry the coinbase transaction as deadweight.
Only the coinbase `vin[0]` has been used to carry meta-data (e.g. signaling P2SH support). The diagram below illustrates the original block layout.

![original block layout](original.png)

Splitting the coinstake transaction into a *monetary creation* and a *coin-age consumption* transaction, has the side effect of creating small value outputs.
Because those outputs are very unlikely to mint new blocks, node implementations are adviced to join them with a future *coin-age consumption* transaction.

The minter is awarded a budget of 1 KB for the *coin-age consumption* transaction in order to adjust their UTXO table as they see fit.
If the *coin-age consumption* transaction is greater than 1 KB, it will have to include the standard fee less 1 KB.

The diagram below illustrates the block layout with a splitted coinstake transaction.

![splitted block layout](split.png)

## Advantages

* Paving the road for other improvements like multi-signature minting.
* Limiting the power of minters to spam the blockchain.

## Drawbacks

* Hard fork

## Alternatives

The *coin-age consumption* transaction could be forced to pay the standard transaction fee, which could be recovered in the *monetary creation* transaction.
As mquandalle [[1]](https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81) describes, the *coin-age consumption* transaction could then be included by blocks on a competing fork, effectively destroying it's coin-age without providing a block reward.
This mechanism would penalize minters building on all forks, and would incentive to mint more actively as orphan blocks risk losing their coin-age.


## References
[1] mquandalle, Split the Peercoin coinstake transaction: [https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81](https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81)

Commit message:

0002 Rewrite
Heavily modified Summary, Motivation, Advantages, and Drawbacks.  Modified Detailed Design to reflect the minter's budget already existing and that it will not affect the coinbase transaction.  The image should probably be modified as well to reflect this in a future commit.

text/0002-split-coinstake-transaction/0002-split-coinstake-transaction.md, after:

# Coinstake Transaction Split

- Status: proposed
- Type: enhancement
- Related components: `protocol`
- Start Date: 22-March-2017
- Discussion: (fill me in with link to RFC discussion - shepherd will complete this)
- Author: hrobeers

## Summary
Splitting the coinstake transaction into a *monetary creation* and a *coin-age consumption* transaction tunes the Peercoin protocol to more closely align with Bitcoin's format.
By putting the block reward back into the coinbase transaction, the coinstake transaction can be signed in advance while the coinbase transaction is signed at the time of block creation.

This RFC depends on [RFC-0004](../0004-remove-transaction-timestamp/0004-remove-transaction-timestamp.md) and enables [RFC-0003](../0003-multisig-minting/0003-multisig-minting.md)

## Conventions
- The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).
- The verb "TO MINT" or "MINTING" refers to the action of trying to create a Block using Proof-of-Stake. "STAKING" is chosen over "MINTING" to avoid confusion with "MINING".

## Motivation
The Peercoin community has sought for a solution to *cold minting* that does not severely complicate the process of adopting code from the Bitcoin ecosystem.
While it is not entirely clear what features constitute 'cold minting', this proposal outlines a particularly protocol-sensitive path to achieve *air gapped minting*, whereby the key used at the time of minting is not sufficient to also move the coins.

Although the splitting of the coinstake transaction has been described extensively by mquandalle [[1]](https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81), it has never been brought up as a possible alternative for *cold minting*.
While the entire mechanisms relies on multiple RFCs, this RFC focuses on the discussion about splitting the coinstake transaction, as it is the most controversial part of the proposal.

As a historical note, discussion of this RFC shed light on the powers of the minter to create *free transactions*, which can be fixed independently of this proposal by limiting the size of the coinbase transaction.

## Detailed Design
Proof-of-Stake blocks in the original peercoin protocol carry the coinbase transaction as deadweight.
Only the coinbase `vin[0]` has been used to carry meta-data (e.g. signaling P2SH support). The diagram below illustrates the original block layout.

![original block layout](original.png)

Splitting the coinstake transaction into a *monetary creation* and a *coin-age consumption* transaction, has the side effect of creating small value outputs.
Because those outputs are very unlikely to mint new blocks, node implementations are adviced to join them with a future *coin-age consumption* transaction.

The minter is currently awarded a budget of 1 KB for the coinstake transaction, and will continue to have this power.
While the coinbase transaction does not currently have this limitation, the *monetary creation* transaction will also be limited to 1 KB.
If either transaction is greater than 1 KB, it will have to include the standard fee less 1 KB.

The diagram below illustrates the block layout with a splitted coinstake transaction.

![splitted block layout](split.png)

## Advantages

* Required for multi-signature minting, as described in [RFC-0003](../0003-multisig-minting/0003-multisig-minting.md)
* While there is no known advantage for aligning the transaction structure with Bitcoin's, it should be taken as a step toward simplification, which can foster innovation.

## Drawbacks

* Dependency on [RFC-0004](../0004-remove-transaction-timestamp/0004-remove-transaction-timestamp.md).
* Hard fork of protocol rules.
* Previous transaction formats will need to be supported beyond the hard fork, until all transaction creation software switches over.
* Previous block formats will need to be supported by full nodes as long as the chain record persists.

## Alternatives

The *coin-age consumption* transaction could be forced to pay the standard transaction fee, which could be recovered in the *monetary creation* transaction.
As mquandalle [[1]](https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81) describes, the *coin-age consumption* transaction could then be included by blocks on a competing fork, effectively destroying it's coin-age without providing a block reward.
This mechanism would penalize minters building on all forks, and would incentive to mint more actively as orphan blocks risk losing their coin-age.


## References
[1] mquandalle, Split the Peercoin coinstake transaction: [https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81](https://gist.github.com/mquandalle/7fe702a595f07f4b0f81)
